 Title of the toolkit: D3SM digital assessment toolkit
 What is this about?
This D3SM toolkit aims to provide ideas, steps, and resources to support
researchers, clinicians, health care managers, and project leads when planning,
implementing, and evaluating digital mental health interventions. It also considers
how to plan for sustainability through implementation.
We created this toolkit by adapting the non-adoption, abandonment, scale-up,
spread, sustainability (NASSS) framework, in combination with a Complexity
Assessment Tool (CAT), developed by Greenhalgh and colleagues.
The assessment toolkit will help users:
- Assess the readiness level of technology(ies) for integration into health care
settings according to the following key domains: (type of technology, value
proposition, intended adopters, healthcare organizations, and external
context);
- Identify barriers and facilitators related to the integration of technology in
health care settings;
- Access resources and tools that may help overcome existing barriers and
support the integration of technology.
We recommend that users apply this tool at different phases of the
implementation process (e.g., conceptualization, planning, implementation,
evaluation, sustainability, commercialization), since barriers and facilitators can
change over time, as can the policy context.
 Who is this toolkit for?
-The toolkit targets researchers and clinicians who develop digital mental health
interventions and plan to implement them;
-As well, the toolkit benefits health care managers, program leads, and clinicians
who wish to adopt mental health innovations for implementation in their clinical
settings.
Given the critical importance of engagement with Indigenous partners and
communities, we stress that development and implementation of digital mental
health interventions geared toward Indigenous populations should be aligned with
Indigenous ways of knowing, values, and practices. Toolkit users from Quebec
should consult the course: ‘Sensibilisation aux réalités autochtones’, available at
this link: Environnement Numérique d’Apprentissage or Formation Continue
Partagée (FCP).

2

 How do I use the D3SM toolkit?
You first need to answer 23 questions under each of the following five domains,
1) type of technology, 2) value proposition, 3) intended adopters, 4) health care
organizations, and 5) external context. Then, you will be able to assess the
challenges and resources associated with each domain as you work toward
implementation and sustainment of your digital intervention. Depending on your
responses, you will receive a list of recommended actions and resources at the
end of your assessment that address the challenges you have identified. By
completing the questions related to all domains, you will also be able to identify
which domains need more input and gauge which measures best respond to the
complexity of your specific intervention. In addition, conducting an assessment
regularly (every three to six months) can also help the project team to monitor and
evaluate the integration process of your digital technology over time.
 How was this D3SM Toolkit developed?
The Douglas Data and Digital Science for Mental Health (D3SM) Implementation
team identified and adapted the NASSS (non-adoption, abandonment and
challenges to scale-up, spread, sustainability) framework, combined with a
Complexity Assessment Toolkit (CAT). The NASSS-CAT was originally
developed by the Interdisciplinary Research in Health Sciences group led by Dr.
Trisha Greenhalgh at the University of Oxford in 2021. Considering its specific
focus on complexities and interdependent characteristics of health technology
projects, we adapted the tool for the Canadian/Quebec health care context after
selecting relevant questions and administering the modified questionnaire with
selected D3SM research teams. We identified resource information through
literature reviews, as well as meetings and consultations with people working on
development and implementation of digital mental health interventions in clinical
settings.

Reference: Greenhalgh T, Maylor H, Shaw S, Wherton J, Papoutsi C, Betton V, Nelissen N,
Gremyr A, Rushforth A, Koshkouei M, Taylor J (The NASSS-CAT tools for understanding,
guiding, monitoring, and researching technology implementation projects in health and social
care: Protocol for an evaluation study in real-world Settings, JMIR Res Protoc 2020;9(5):
e16861

 Glossary
Acceptability Perception of satisfaction and agreement among interested
parties involved in various aspects related to implementing
innovations (e.g., content, complexity, delivery, credibility,

3

safety)

Adoption Intention, decision or action to test or employ an innovation
Appropriateness Perceived fit, relevance, suitability of the innovation for a given
provider, target users, settings, and/or perceived fit of the
innovation to address an identified issue

Co-design Human-centered approach to design involving collaboration and
engagement with users alongside researchers, designers, and
stakeholders in the identification of problems and development
of solutions (Vial et al., 2023)

Digital mental
health
interventions

Mental health services and information delivery using the
Internet and related to technologies, including mobile apps,
virtual reality, artificial intelligence, wearables, telehealth, instant
messaging

Digital navigator A dedicated health care professional whose task in hospitals and
clinics is to select evidence-based apps, troubleshoot, and
interpret digital data outputs in a clinically meaningful way
Effectiveness The degree to which an innovation achieves its intended
outcomes in addressing a specific health problem or need
Engagement The state in which users actively invest their physical, affective,
and cognitive energies into a stimulus or task related to the
digital innovation (Nahum-Shani et al., 2022)

Feasibility The degree to which an innovation can be successfully used

within a given setting

Innovation A novel set of behaviors, routines and ways of working that are
discontinuous with previous practices, directed at improving
health outcomes, administrative efficiency, cost effectiveness, or
user experience, and that are implemented by planned and
coordinated actions (Greenhalgh et al., 2004)

Innovation
readiness

Level of maturity in an organization to successfully adopt new
innovations based on four major themes: strategic course of
innovation, climate for innovation, leadership for innovation,
commitment to innovation (van den Hoed et al., 2022)

Interoperability Ability of computer systems to communicate with each other in
order to share and use information. For example, sustainability
of the project can be established in the health system by
connecting data from an app to online patient health care
records.

Patient-partner An individual with lived experience of a health issue, or a
caregiver, family member, or friend who actively contributes to
health research or quality improvement initiatives (CIHR)
Sustainment The extent to which a newly introduced innovation is integrated,
maintained or institutionalized within the ongoing operations of a
service setting

Usability The ease of use or extent to which the innovation may

accomplish its goals

Value proposition A statement that explains both features of the innovation and

4
benefits that the innovation will deliver to a health care
organization

Sustainment The extent to which a newly introduced innovation is integrated,
maintained or institutionalized within the ongoing operations of a
service setting(s)

(Source: ImpRes-Guide)
 Terms of Use
The D3SM Digital Assessment Toolkit (‘D3SM Toolkit’) was developed as part of
the Douglas Digital Data Science for Mental Health initiative (D3SM), which aims
to support the implementation of digital technologies into mental health care
settings in the domains of 1) technology, 2) value proposition, 3) intended
adopters, 4) health care organizations, and 5) external context. Further
information about how to use the D3SM Toolkit can be found in “How do I use the
D3SM toolkit?” (Hyperlinked with the section). This Toolkit was created based on
the NASSS-CAT originally developed by the Interdisciplinary Research in Health
Sciences group at the University of Oxford. The D3SM Toolkit is undergoing
continual updates, and members of D3SM assume no liability arising from the use
of this Toolkit. Neither D3SM members nor employees, directors, or agents of the
Douglas Research Centre assume any legal liability or responsibility for the
accuracy, reliability, completeness, or usefulness of any information presented in
this Toolkit. The Toolkit may not be modified or adapted without the written
consent of the D3SM. The Toolkit may be reproduced and disseminated for non-
commercial purposes, but only in the original format and must include this notice:
Please contact us by email at XXXXX for any questions.
-&gt; I agree to the Terms of Use (Checkbox to go Next).
(Instruction to Keya and Trent): “Save and Continue later” option (If so, the link
will be sent to an E-mail address. The link will expire in 90 days)
 Information about your project
In order to provide a relevant information resource and improve the toolkit
content, we would encourage you to share your project information regarding
improvement of the toolkit. The assessment results will be sent to the provided e-
mail address.
Project Title:
Type of project (Select all that apply): app, artificial intelligence, big data, cloud
service, instant messaging, operating system, portal (electronic) medical records,
smartphone, social media, software, telehealth, virtual reality, wearable, website,
other (please describe).

5
If multiple settings, please select the setting where you are planning to integrate
the technology:
Project location: Country, State/Province/Region.
If ‘Quebec,’ then please select the CISSS/CIUSSS where the project will be
implemented from the list of CISSS/CIUSSS here.
Are you a researcher at the Douglas Research Institute or St. Mary’s Research
Centre?
 Yes
 No
E-mail address (where to send assessment results):

Domain 1: Technology
This domain looks at the multiple complexities around technology, such as
functionality of the technology itself, and the required knowledge and
infrastructure to use it.
1.1: The current version of the innovation is already in a robust and definitive
form.
 Yes
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 No
Recommended actions (for those who check “Do not know” “No”):
1. Assess the technology readiness levels.
2. Consult the Digital Intervention Development Guide (Figure 2) that supports
efforts to develop digital mental health interventions from theoretical inception to
actual intervention.
(Mertens, E. C. A., &amp; Van Gelder, J. L. (2025). The DID-guide: A guide to
developing digital mental health interventions. Internet Interventions, 39, 100794.)
For Quebec respondents,
3. Consult Digi-Guide Axel and receive support from Centre Axel for digital
technology development.
1.2: There are significant privacy concerns over your digital health innovations.

6

 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions (For those who select “Do not know” “Yes”) :
1. Consult the Digital Privacy Playbook (Government of Canada) and Privacy and
Security Guideline (Canada Health Infoway) to start planning for privacy
considerations

2. Check the relevant privacy regulations (Federal/Provincial):
The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) -
Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada
Datum project-List of regulations

3. Check the privacy policy of the technology developed by the third party to
comply with the institutional privacy and data security guideline.

4. Consult the IT department for data security protocol and requirement.

For Quebec respondents:
1. Please be aware that, in Quebec, the Privacy Impact Assessment/Évaluation
des facteurs relatifs à la vie privée (EFVP) is required if your research needs to access
patient information/charts without consent .

Also see:
Law 5: Act respecting health and social services information
Law 25: Act respecting the protection of personal information in the private
sector
2. Check the privacy policy of the technology developed by the third party to
comply with the institutional privacy and data security guidelines.
For CIUSSS de L’Ouest -de-l’île-de-Montréal/Douglas respondents:

7
3. Contact the website of the CIUSSS de L’Ouest -de-l’île-de-Montréal research
support team (L’Unité de Soutien et d’Encadrement de la Recherche (USER) for
the updated information and procedures.
4. Consult the IT department for the data security protocol and requirements (e.g.,
a security questionnaire, compliance with ISO 27001/02, ISO 27017, la loi
québécoise sur la protection de la vie privée 25, and Personal Information
Protection and Electronic Documents Act).
5. If the third-party technology does not have a recent penetration test report,
ISO, and other compliance, contact the CIUSSS IT for penetration test done by
the Quebec Health Ministry.

1.3: There are significant data security concerns (interrupt, manipulate, or gain
unauthorized access to data) over the use of your digital innovation.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:
1. Consult the Privacy and Security Guideline (Canada Health Infoway) to
start planning for security considerations:
Canada Health Infoway Digital Health Solutions Privacy and Security
Guideline
2. Be transparent about data security, privacy, and use to clinicians, service
users throughout the project, and about use of the technology.

For Quebec respondents:

3. Webinar (French only): Anonymisation des données de santé en droit
québécois

1.4: There are significant uncertainties about the technology’s usability and
acceptability by target users.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know

8

 Yes
Recommended actions:
1. Conduct needs assessment with target users (e.g., clinicians,
service users).
2. Co-design the innovation with patient-partners.
 Microsite on patient partnership in research (interactive tour,
resources and testimonials) (Unite de Soutien SSA Quebec).
https://ssaquebec.ca/en/news/microsite-on-patient-partnership-in-
research-interactive-tour-resources-and-testimonials/
 Patients as Partners in Research: Planning Guidelines (SPOR
Patients Canada):
https://ossu.ca/wp-content/uploads/Planningguidelines_-
_pub_2016.pdf
 Best Practice Guidelines for the engagement of people with lived
experience (CAMH):
https://www.camh.ca/-/media/professionals-files/engagement-
people-lived-experience-mhresearch2024-pdf.pdf
3. Explore different patterns of engagement with digital mental
health interventions.
Table 1 (Engagement facilitators):
https://bmcdigitalhealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s44247-024-
00105-9/tables/1
Reference: Boucher, E.M., Raiker, J.S. Engagement and retention in digital
mental health interventions: a narrative review. BMC Digit Health 2, 52
(2024)

4. Assess target user perspectives on acceptability, feasibility, and
engagement.
 For acceptability and feasibility assessment: Acceptability of
Intervention Measures

9
 Assessment Framework for Mental Health Apps (Mental Health
Commission of Canada): Consult the structure “Usability and
Accessibility”
 For engagement assessment: User Engagement Scale

5. Hold a meeting to visualize key issues with clinicians who potentially
use the innovation.
 E-mental health planning canvas (Appendix 4, MHCC E-mental
health implementation toolkit).
6. During pre-implementation, offer training and supervision on using
the innovation.
7. During implementation, offer ongoing supervision and engage
“champions” to inform other users about the innovation.

1.5: The technology needs to be installed across multiple technical
systems
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:
1. Assess whether integration between multiple systems is really
necessary or if there are ways to avoid or delay this during initial
testing.
2. Consult with the IT departments of each institution to identify, negotiate
and resolve infrastructural conflicts (e.g., lack of accessibility or
hindering requirements).
3. Understand the concept of interoperability and how it can improve
patient experience.
 The Path to Connected Care | Canada Health Infoway
 Procuring Interoperability: Achieving High-Quality, Connected, and
Person-Centered Care

10
1.6: There is a need to upgrade/change the organization’s IT system for
implementing (e.g., new hardware, better bandwidth).
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:
1. Reassess whether it is really necessary to have the IT system
upgraded or changed, or if there are ways to avoid or delay this during
initial testing.
2. If upgrading is necessary, estimate operational costs (ongoing recurrent
costs for upgrading and maintaining the system) to assess feasibility
and sustainability.

For Douglas/CIUSSS de L’Ouest -de-l’île-de-Montréal :

3. Contact the Douglas Neuro informatics Platform team for consulting
services in software development and system administration.

1.7: There is a need for individual users (patients, clinicians, or
researchers) to upgrade their personal devices.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:

1. Reassess whether it is really necessary to have individual users
upgrade their personal devices to use the innovation, or if there
are ways to avoid or delay this during initial testing.
2. Assess target users’ perceptions of acceptability,
appropriateness, and feasibility: Acceptability of Intervention
Measure

1.8 The technology is likely to require major changes to organisational
tasks and routines (e.g., new administrative processes, staff needing to
do their jobs in a different way).
 No
 Not applicable

11

 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:
1. Hold a meeting with colleagues and other clinic staff of organizations
implementing innovations to identify changes that may likely be brought
by the innovation, and to gauge their concerns.
Workflow checkup (Appendix 3, MHCC E-mental health
implementation toolkit).

Domain 2: Value proposition
This domain concerns for whom a new technology generates values, including value to
the patient, the developer, and the health system.

2.1 There is evidence that demonstrates the efficacy of the innovation for
the patient group.
 Yes
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 No

Recommended actions:
1. Evaluate comparative clinical effectiveness and comparative value by
using the Evidence Rating Matrix developed by Institute for Clinical and
Economic Review (US).
https://icer.org/evidence-rating-matrix/
https://icer.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Rating-Matrix-User-Guide-
UPDATED-06.30.17.pdf

2. Collect patient-reported outcome and experience measures.
PROMs and PREMs Toolkit (Quebec Soutien SSA)

12
2.2 The adoption and implementation of the innovation may create
additional work for clinicians.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:
1. Involve managers from the early stage of adoption so they can inform
the need for changes and how clinicians and/or patients may benefit from
them.
2. Clearly communicate the changes to allow for preparation.
(Nilsen, P., Seing, I., Ericsson, C. et al. Characteristics of successful
changes in health care organizations: an interview study with physicians,
registered nurses and assistant nurses. BMC Health Serv Res 20, 147
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-020-4999-8).
3. Listen to concerns.
4. Assist with onboarding (e.g., educational materials, point-person).
5. Design and offer training.
6. Engage local champions to address (potential) resistance to change.
7. Identify effective strategies through StrategEase Tool.
(The Center for Implementation. (2022). StrategEase Tool).
2.3 The technology has already been shown to be cost-effective in terms
of how much benefit it will bring for a given financial outlay.
 Yes
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 No

Recommended actions:
1. Assess market viability of the innovation to project demand and market
for innovations, estimate benefit, know who would pay, and forecast
challenges for scaling and sustainment.

13
https://implementationscience.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13012-
021-01168-2/tables/1

2. Conduct cost-benefit analysis.
 Cost calculation in implementation (Gold, H.T., McDermott, C.,
Hoomans, T. et al. Cost data in implementation science: categories
and approaches to costing. Implementation Sci 17, 11 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-021-01172-6).
 Cost-benefit analysis primer for community health workers
https://azprc.arizona.edu/sites/default/files/CHWtoolkit/PDFs/FRAMEW
OR/COSTBENE.PDF

3. Develop a strategic plan (business model) which delivers value (over
time) in economic, social, and economic contexts.
 Business Model Canvas template
4. Seek funding opportunities for innovation advancement,
implementation, and sustainment.
 Funding opportunities | Canada Foundation for Innovation
 Find a Program - Mitacs
 McGill Clinical Innovation Competition
2.4 There are user safety concerns about the technology or the
care model with the technology.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:

1. Consult IT department and other departments related to patient
safety to make sure the technology complies with the safety
protocol.
2. Consult the Assessment Framework for Mental Health Apps:
Data, Clinical safety, Enhanced Data Sovereignty.
3. Provide appropriate education and training to users (service
users, clinicians) for safe use of health technology.

14
4. If service users use the innovation, tailor instructional materials
to be accessible to their literacy level (e.g., simple language,
pictorial instructions).
5. Make plans for monitoring patient safety, well-being and
emotional effects of technology used in addition to physiological
outcomes.
(Grosman-Rimon, Liza; Wegier, Pete. With advancement in
health technology comes great responsibility – Ethical and safety
considerations for using digital health technology: A narrative
review. Medicine 103(33):p e39136, August 16, 2024. | DOI:
10.1097/MD.0000000000039136).
6. Make technical assistance available.

2.5 There are concerns that the technology could widen
inequalities while improving care/access for some patients.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:

1. Aim to ensure equity regarding who can access the innovation.
2. Identify unintended potential health impacts on vulnerable or
marginalized populations.
 Health Equity Impact Assessment (HEIA) | CAMH
 Assessment Framework for Mental Health Apps (Mental
Health Commission of Canada): Consult “Cultural Safety,
Social Responsibility &amp; Equity”.
3. Try inclusive practices when co-designing with socially excluded
persons (Guide).
4. Consult the Accessibility Standards and Technical Guide to
remove potential accessibility barriers and improve accessibility
(Government of Canada).
 Technical guide: Accessible and Equitable Artificial
Intelligence Systems

15
 Standards: Accessibility requirements for ICT products and
services
5. Tailor and offer Digital Outreach for Obtaining Resources and
Skills (DOORS) program to support development of digital
literacy skills of service users (particularly those with severe
mental illness).

Domain 3: Intended adopters of innovation/technology
This domain looks at the complexity of the adopter system, i.e., clinicians, staff, patients
and carers who are expected to use the technology but who may refuse to use it or find
that they are unable to use it.

3.1 Some patients will view the innovation/technology in a negative
way (e.g., not appropriate for their home, or triggering something
that they would prefer to forget about).
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:
1. Assess the level of enthusiasm/concern about the technology from
different service user/staff groups, and how motivated they are to
take on the new technology.
2. Create and distribute educational materials about the innovation
including blogs, podcasts, webinars, and in-person or digital
sessions
(Balcombe, L., &amp; De Leo, D. (2021). Digital mental health
challenges and the horizon ahead for solutions. JMIR Mental
Health, 8(3), e26811.).
3. Provide clear communication to clients about how information is
going to be used.
(Zhao, X., Stadnick, N. A., Ceballos-Corro, E., Castro Jr, J., Mallard-
Swanson, K., Palomares, K. J., ... &amp; Sorkin, D. H. (2023).

16
Facilitators of and barriers to integrating digital mental health into
county mental health services: qualitative interview analyses. JMIR
Formative Research, 7(1), e45718.).
4. Once implementation has started, create “communities of practice”
(groups or networks of people who share an interest in something
and are trying to get better at it) where service users/clinicians/staff
learn about the use and benefit of the new technology.

3.2 Some staff members/clinicians/researchers may believe that
adopting innovation is more time-consuming than existing practice.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes

Recommended actions:

1. Assess the confidence of staff within an organization regarding their
ability to carry out the necessary process changes mandated by a
proposed intervention.

eMental Health Adoption Readiness (eMHAR) Scale
Organizational Readiness for Implementing Change

2. Listen to concerns.
3. Assist with onboarding (e.g., educational materials, point-person)
4. Design and offer training.
 Digital health professional development courses (Digital Health
Canada)
 Digital research infrastructure training (Digital Research Alliance of
Canada)

5. Collaborate with local champions.
6. Identify effective strategies through the StrategEase Tool.
(The Center for Implementation. (2022). StrategEase Tool).

17
3.3 Some individuals or teams do not have the resources, time, space
or support to learn to use the innovation.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes

Recommended actions:
1. For patients, identifying times within patient treatment schedules when
they are available to engage with the technology and provide technical
support.
(Park, S. Y., Sigmon, C. N., &amp; Boeldt, D. (2022). A framework for the
implementation of digital mental health interventions).
2. For clinicians, embed learning in the workflow (suitable tools and
guides to encourage innovation) for easy access and demonstrations of
content (e.g., video creation, use of a dashboard).
(Balcombe, L., &amp; De Leo, D. (2021). Digital mental health challenges
and the horizon ahead for solutions. JMIR Mental Health, 8(3),
e26811).
3. Have technology specialists or digital navigators tasked with introducing
innovations to service users.
(Connolly, S.L., Hogan, T.P., Shimada, S.L. et al. Leveraging
Implementation Science to Understand Factors Influencing Sustained
Use of Mental Health Apps: a Narrative Review. J. technol. behav. sci.
6, 184–196 (2021)).

4. Identify and implement effective strategies through StrategEase Tool
(The Center for Implementation. (2022). StrategEase Tool).

Domain 4: Organizations implementing the technology

18
This domain focuses on the organization’s capacity to innovate, readiness for a new
innovation, funding decisions, potential disruption to existing routines, and the extent of
additional work to implement changes.

4.1: All aspects of the procurement process (e.g. Who will fund this? Who
will be liable for costs? Is there an identified budget? Is the funding
recurrent? Are there issues with timing/accruals of funding?) are already
clear.
 Yes
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 No
Recommended actions:
1. Consult
 Digital Health Solutions Procurement Toolkit (Canada Infoway)
 Artificial Intelligence Procurement Toolkit (Canada Infoway)

For Douglas/CIUSSS de L’Ouest -de-l’île-de-Montréal :

4.2: The implementing organization has limited resources (people or
money) to channel into innovative projects.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:

1. Budget adequate for staff to learn and adjust as the transition
occurs.
2. Test commercial feasibility and technological development by
financing and supporting projects in the start-up phase (INSSS
Bulletin v.10).
3. Consider a recurrent budget line (e.g., licenses, IT support).

4. Have a digital navigator (a dedicated health care profession whose
task in hospitals and clinics would be to select evidence-based apps,
troubleshoot, and interpret digital data outputs in a clinically meaningful
way) to introduce and support the use of a novel technology.

19
(Spadaro, B., Martin-Key, N. A., &amp; Bahn, S. (2021). Building the
digital mental health ecosystem: opportunities and challenges for
mobile health innovators. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
23(10), e27507.

4.3: The implications (e.g., work required) of introducing,
implementing and evaluating the technology have been adequately
assessed by the implementing organization.
 Yes
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 No
Recommended actions:

1. Encourage the innovation development team to clearly
communicate the conditions of use to the implementing
organization managers as well as field teams (INSSS Bulletin
v.10).
2. Conduct organizational readiness assessment.
https://staging.dissemination-implementation.org/wp-
content/uploads/2024/05/531c7f_dbd8360b53b146b6a4fbffcb32
1cacfd.pdf
3. Assess the level of support from both top management as well
as non-managerial staff by conducting stakeholder analysis.
4. Map out tasks and processes in the organization for how the
innovation is likely to change them through a meeting with
colleagues and other clinic staff to identify changes that may
likely to be brought about by the innovation and gauge their
concerns.
Workflow checkup (Appendix 3, MHCC E-mental health
implementation toolkit)
5. At the early phase of implementation (trial period), offer
temporary or restricted access to the innovation with
development of evidence in order to continue data collection and
inform downstream decision-making (INSSS Bulletine v.10).

20
6. Document routinely collected outcome data and publish them to
present the value of the services.
(Titov, N., Hadjistavropoulos, H. D., Nielssen, O., Mohr, D. C.,
Andersson, G., &amp; Dear, B. F. (2019). From research to practice:
ten lessons in delivering digital mental health services.

4.4: Organisational routines and processes will need to change
considerably to accommodate the technology.
 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:

1. Understand the principles and pathway for making a change:
 Parcours de gestion du changement (Gestion du changement
en santé et services sociaux: les principes de bases).
https://ssa.illuxi.com/activites/parcours-gestion-changement-
8516
 Lean Six Sigma certification :
https://www.theleansixsigmacompany.ca/
 The Art of Change Making
https://www.leadershipcentre.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/The-Art-of-Change-Making.pdf
2. Provide ongoing organizational support (e.g., IT support, feature
specific training, step-by-step instructions).
(Zhao, X., Stadnick, N. A., Ceballos-Corro, E., Castro Jr, J.,
Mallard-Swanson, K., Palomares, K. J., ... &amp; Sorkin, D. H.
(2023). Facilitators of and barriers to integrating digital mental
health into county mental health services: qualitative interview
analyses. JMIR Formative Research, 7(1), e45718.)

21
3. Encourage innovation development teams to clearly
communicate the conditions of use to clinical teams (INESSS
Bulletin v.10).
4. Professionals independently formulate rules and procedures to
organize their digital practice.
(Mendes-Santos, C., Nunes, F., Weiderpass, E., Santana, R., &amp;
Andersson, G. (2022). Understanding mental health
professionals’ perspectives and practices regarding the
implementation of digital mental health: qualitative study. JMIR
formative research, 6(4), e32558).
5. Consider how implementation success can be evaluated for
sustainment.
6. Increase organizational adaptability to local priorities,
resources, needs, and regulations as they evolve (ISSS
Bulletin v.10).
7. Plan for sustainability
 Long term success tool to identify risks and prompt
actions to enhance sustainability over time.
Lennox L, Doyle C, Reed J, Bell D. What makes a
sustainability tool valuable, practical, and useful in real world
healthcare practice? A qualitative study on the development
of the Long-term Success Tool in Northwest London. BMJ
Open. 2017;7(e014417):1–13).

Domain 5: External context for innovation
This domain concerns the wider system, how external social, political, technological, and
economic context may affect the uptake of innovations.

5.1: External political or economic changes impacting on the
implementing organisation could threaten the introduction of the
innovation.
 No
 Not applicable

22

 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:

1. Assess if the new technology and the proposed changes to
services align with the strategic priorities for the wider health
system (e.g., health policy, national priorities for actions and
improvement).
 E-mental health strategy for Canada (Mental Health
Commission of Canada).

For respondents in Quebec:

 Santé Québec strategic plan (2025-2028)

For Douglas/CIUSSS de L’Ouest -de-l’île-de-Montréal :

 Douglas Research Centre strategic plan (2021-2025)
 Santé Québec strategic plan (2025-2028)
2. Try to align the project with current policy priorities by trying
to ‘rebrand’ your work to fit these.
3. Keep a close eye on the outer context.

5.2: Regulatory requirements for using the technology in a health
care setting have been fully defined.
 Yes
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 No
Recommended actions:

1. Consider which regulations (from which regulatory bodies)
are relevant to the introduction of your innovations.
List of regulations: Datum project
2. Identify who you need to work with to address regulatory
issues and challenges.

23

For Douglas/ CIUSSS de L’Ouest -de-l’île-de-Montréal :

3.Contact or check the website of l&#39;Unité de Soutien et
d’Encadrement de la Recherche (USER)

5.3: Introduction of the technology/innovation could be
threatened by external changes that impact on the organisation (e.g.,
policies, regulatory framework, tech industry)

 No
 Not applicable
 Do not know
 Yes
Recommended actions:

1. Assess if there are existing inter-organizational networks that may
be helpful in supporting the proposed changes.
2. Try to establish inter-organizational networks or collaboratives so
that complex, organization-wide change becomes easier.
Improvement collaboratives in health care
For those in Quebec
3. Inter-organizational networks for digital mental health in Quebec
- Alliance en santé mentale du Québec
- Centre Axel
- Réseau santé numérique

Useful resources (General):
 Guide de soutien à l&#39;appréciation de la valeur (in French) (2024) INSSS
 6-Step Guide to mHealth Implementation (Unite de soutien SSA Quebec) (2024)
 Toolkit for e-Mental Health Implementation (Mental Health Commission of
Canada 2018)
 Implementation science research development (ImpRes) tool: A practical guide to
using the ImpRes tool (2018) King’s College London